---
title: Stuff I use
slug: uses
is_draft: false
reading_time_minutes:
published_at: 2025-03-29 12:25:06Z
tags:
  - uses
---

A lot of people ask me about my setup, and there's a wider community of people who [share their setups](https://uses.tech/) which seems fun! So here's mine.

## Hardware

### Machines

I use a lot of machines! I primarily use my main workstation, one of two laptops, and homelab server.

Right now my machines are all named after characters in the [Madoka Magica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puella_Magi_Madoka_Magica) universe.

- **madoka** is my primary workstation for work and personal use.
    - Model: Custom
    - OS: `Windows 11 LTSC` running `NixOS` in `WSL2`
    - CPU: AMD Ryzen 9 5950X
    - GPU: NVIDIA RTX 3080
    - RAM: 96GB DDR4
- **iroha** is my laptop for work.
    - Model: M3 MacBook Pro 14"
    - OS: `macOS 15` running `nix-darwin`
    - CPU: 14 Core Apple M4
    - GPU: 20 Core Apple M4
    - RAM: 24GB LPDDR5
- **homura** is my laptop for personal use.
    - Model: XPS 13 Developer Edition
    - OS: `NixOS`
    - CPU: Intel Core i7-1185G7
    - GPU: Intel Iris Xe Graphics
    - RAM: 32GB LPDDR4x
- **kyubey** is my homelab server.
    - Model: Custom
    - OS: `NixOS`
    - CPU: AMD Ryzen 9 3700X
    - GPU: NVIDIA RTX 1080
    - RAM: 96GB DDR4
- **sayaka** is my tablet for reading/leisure.
    - Model: Surface Pro 9 (5G)
    - OS: `Windows 11`
    - CPU: Microsoft SQ3
    - GPU: Microsoft SQ3
    - RAM: 16GB LPDDR4x

I do whatever I can to install `nix` or `nixos` and rely on cloning my configuration from my [nix-config](https://github.com/vereis/nix-config), responsible for bootstrapping my environment.

### Keyboard

I collect keyboards and switch between them fairly regularly. My current collection includes:

My daily rotation includes:

- **HHKB Pro 2** in beige with JIS keycaps and o-rings.
- **HHKB Hybrid Type-S** in white with blank keycaps and o-rings.
- **F62 Kishsaver** in beige with JIS keycaps and a HHKB layout.

My collection also includes the following boards, but they're often on-loan to friends:

- **IBM Model M** in beige with a blue logo, blank keycaps, ANSI.
- **IBM Model M** in beige with a grey logo, blank keycaps, ISO.
- **Keychron Q60** in beige with Gateron PRO Brown switches.
- **HHKB Pro 2** in black with silenced Topre 45g switches.

### Mouse

I'm not very picky about my mouse, but currently I use:

- `Lofree Touch` which is my daily driver.
- `MX Master 3` which I own several of, primarily for travel.

I do want to try some rollerball mice soon, but I'm not sure which one to get.

> Honestly speaking, the `MX Master 3` is a better mouse, but the `Lofree Touch` is cute and matches my keyboards, and I'm a sucker for aesthetics.

### Desk Setup

I recently got an under-desk treadmill and it's been great for my health and productivity, but otherwise my setup is pretty minimal.

- **Desk**: Fully Jarvis Walnut
    - **Monitor**: Phillips PHL 279C9
    - **Monitor Arm**: Herman Miller Flo
    - **Webcam**: Elgato Facecam Pro
    - **Mic**: Blue Yeti
- **Chair**: Herman Miller Aeron
- **Speakers**: Logitech Z906
- **Headphones**: Sony WH-1000XM4
- **Earbuds**: AirPods Pro

I can't stand using any display that isn't 4K and can't be run at 144hz. I also use a single monitor which some people find surprising.

I'm not at all an audiophile though, so don't trust my opinions on audio equipment.

## Software

### Terminal

- **Emulator**- `wezterm` on MacOS and Linux, `Windows Terminal` on Windows.
- **Font**- `tamsyn`.
- **Colorscheme**- `rosepine` with a darker background.
- **Shell**- `zsh`
    - **Framework**- `prezto`
    - **Prompt**- `powerlevel10k`
    - **Plugins**- `zsh-autosuggestions`, `zsh-syntax-highlighting`, `fzf`
- **Multiplexer**- `zellij`

> Yes, I do indeed still use an 8px bitmap font in `$CURRENT_YEAR`; sometimes aesthetics are more important than readability for me!

## Editor

I use [Neovim](https://neovim.io/) for all my editing needs.

Some abridged highlights of my configuration include:

- **Plugin Manager**: `Lazy`
- **LSP**: `Mason`
- **Fuzzy Finder**: `Telescope` with `fzf`
- **Git Integration**: `git-signs`
- **File Tree**: `neotree`
- **Copilot**: `copilot.vim`

> I intend on playing around with `oil.nvim` soon too, which lets you edit the filesystem like any standard buffer.

I don't tend to use splits much, and I'm weaning myself off of using tabs too. I manage my buffers as though they were tabs and primarily use `:telecope` or LSP goto-definition to navigate between them.

You can see my full [config here](https://github.com/vereis/nix-config/tree/master/modules/home/neovim/lua).

## Web Stuff

Outside of the terminal, the only _real_ thing I interact with is a web browser. I use `qutebrowser` for all my browsing needs.

I don't use any browser extensions either, which many find strange.

- **Browser** - `qutebrowser`
- **Search Engine** - Kagi
- **Email** - Google Workspace
- **Domain Registrar** - Porkbun
- **Hosting** - fly.io or Hetzner
- **VPS** - Tailscale

I don't use an email client, and I don't use a feed reader either. I just use the web browser for everything.

> `qutebrowser` is a keyboard-driven browser, and at this point if it has sidebar tabs and vim keybindings, I'm sold.
>
> It actually doesn't render some websites correctly, but I'm okay with that. Otherwise I'd use `firefox`.

### Subscriptions

I have the following subscriptions that I pay for, which pretty much covers any other software I use:

- **Password Manager** - 1Password
- **Media** -
    - Netflix
    - Amazon Prime
    - Crunchyroll
    - Disney+
    - YouTube Premium
- **Music** - khaudio, Spotify
- **Chat** - Discord Nitro
- **Games** -
    - Xbox Game Pass
    - PlayStation Plus
    - Nintendo Switch Online
    - Humble Choice

### Backups

I unironically don't back up my data.

I don't have any data that I can't afford to lose, and I don't have any data that I can't recreate. If it's important, it's in a git repository.

> Thanks to [nix](https://nixos.org/), I can recreate my entire environment from scratch in less than ten minutes.
>
> I recommend reading [Erase your darlings](https://grahamc.com/blog/erase-your-darlings/).
