---
title: Drinking the NixOS kool-aid
slug: nixos_kool_aid
is_draft: false
reading_time_minutes:
published_at: 2023-07-20 20:09:30Z
tags:
  - nix
  - guide
---

## Context

I've been using [nix and nixos](https://nixos.org) since Jun 20, 2020... which makes me feel old.

Before this, I used to distro-hop easily once or twice every few months! I'm still no expert at `nix`, but if anything, it cured my distrohopping.

I now run it on every computing device I own in one way or another!

At first, I was attracted to how esoteric it was (like it or not, esoteric wizardry is cool). As soon as I had gotten my setup comfy, I knew that this technology was being sat on (TwT).

I don't think this post will convince anyone to move over to `nix` or `nixos` perse, but I still hope it does; shilling for niche tech I like is a hobby of mine after all (UwU).

## Difficulties

One of the first things people might run into when they look into `nix` is that `nix` refers to one of three (at least) different things:

1. Nix, the language.
2. Nix, the package manager.
3. Nix(OS), the operating system.
4. Probably many more things...

I'm definitely not a `nix-lang` wizard, so this post will stop short of actually talking much about the particulars of the language, though if you're interested, I hear [this guide](https://nix.dev/tutorials/nix-language) is a great place to start.

You definitely don't need to become an expert at `nix-lang` to get returns out of investing in the `nix` tech tree. The language itself feels a little like a weird mix of `json` and `haskell`... and you can definitely pick up a lot of it by using it in anger and being pragmatic.

Because of this (and my lack of expertise), I'll try to talk about the parts of `nix` I actually use in a pragmatic sense. To do that, we'll need to ELI5 the package manager and operating system, before delving into my configuration :)

## What is Nix (Package Manager)

Very briefly: `nix` is a functional package manager that happens to work on Linux, Mac, and Windows (via WSL)! I think you can also use it on at least OpenBSD but I'm not familiar with that.

At its core, you use `nix` to install software just like you would via [homebrew](https://brew.sh/), [winget](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli), or any other package manager.

> As an aside, in the last few years, a lot of other tech has been called a "package manager" like [npm](npmjs.com) and [asdf](https://asdf-vm.com).
>
> I actually feel like "package manager" refers to, like `nix`, three different things:
>
> - `brew` is used for installing os applications (tailscale, firefox, etc).
> - `asdf` is used for installing project dependencies (database, programming language, etc).
> - `npm` is used for installing code dependencies (libraries, gems, etc.)
>
> There are fuzzy boundaries here, but they feel very different in my head, whereas `nix` can do all of these and more... (uwu)

You can use the command `nix-env --install <package>` to install stuff! Great! You're done!

_But wait, hol' up..._

Doing that sidesteps most of the benefits of using `nix`, and in my opinion, totally goes against the philosophy of the `nix` tech tree.

### Functional Package Management

See, unlike most package managers, `nix` describes itself as being _"functional."_

In these traditional package managers, when you install a package like `firefox`, you get a global installation (or maybe a per-user installation) of `firefox`. This is fine, but `firefox` might depend on specific versions of other packages that need to be installed first.

What happens if you need to install multiple pieces of software that depend on different versions of the same dependency?

Well... thankfully when you're sticking to the happy path and not doing anything too esoteric, you won't run into this because we can work around it by vendoring (or doing other equally nasty things) to sidestep the issue.

It gets trickier if you want to install multiple versions of, say, `erlang`, or `python` on your operating system. Heck, even installing `python` via your OS's package manager might break the world, because you're overwriting the version of `python` that was bundled with the OS...

This is why certain package managers (really "version managers" like `asdf`) exist to work around the issue. They allow you to run multiple versions of the same application on your machines on a project-by-project basis.

In short, _imperative_ package management is hard! Lots of global state, mutation is dangerous, _insert rant about functional programming here._

When you install a package with `nix`, instead of installing a package named `firefox` into your OS' global state, you're installing some automatically derived hash to the "nix store" which gets added to your `PATH`.

That way, you can have multiple versions of the same package installed in your system at once because they have different hashes.

With some fancy tools, you can even automatically change your `PATH` to point to different versions of different packages on a project-by-project basis!

It is even cooler than that though! Entries in the `/nix/store/` aren't just binaries, but are entire directories that contain an entire FHS (File Hierarchy Standard: `/bin`, `/home`, `/etc`, etc.) that includes:

- The required dependencies of a specific package.
- Any configuration for said package.
- The package itself.

BOOM. No more package hell. Every package is completely isolated from everything else.

Packages in the `/nix/store/` can be linked or depend on other packages in the `/nix/store/`, and they can all cooexist independently from everything else. Sick.

### Declarative Packagamenet Management

That being said... you don't _actually_ lose any of the functional magic of `nix` when you try installing software via `nix-env --install <package>` since `nix` is fundamentally functional. Installed packages are still built in a pure way, and added to the `/nix/store/`.

However, a large part of the `nix` philosophy also involves being _declarative_.

When you install applications via any package manager (or running `nix-env`), you're effectively mutating global state.

You can add, change, or remove packages from this global state, and it can sometimes be difficult to know the state of everything thats currently installed and why its installed.

Enter declarative package management. This comes free when you're using `nixos`, but on standalone installations of `nix` you can get similar workflows by utilizing features, plugins, or tools such as:

- [home-manager](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/) which lets you configure packages on a user-by-user basis on `nix` or `nixos` systems.
- [nix-darwin](https://github.com/LnL7/nix-darwin) which lets you configure various aspects of MacOS, as well as letting you declaratively manage `casks`.
- [flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes) which... is a rabbit-hole of super cool functionality that comes with `nix` (but is still experimental so you need to opt-in).

When you use any of these things, you end up editing a configuration file (and hopefully keeping it version controlled somehow) rather than futzing around with `nix-env` directly.

A minimal example of a `nixos` style `configuration.nix` might look like this:

```nix
{ config, lib, pkgs, ... }:

{
  imports = [];
  environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [ firefox steam zsh tmux ];
}
```

When you install `nix`, an implementation detail (at least as far as I've used it) is that it configures something called a `nix-profile` which is tied to your user.

A `nix-profile` is just a composition of packages that need to be installed. These are typically called "generations". The act of installing packages (declaratively, or imperatively) changes your `nix-profile`.

When your `nix-profile` changes (i.e. we create a new generation), `nix` will install/build any packages that need to be built, remove any packages that need to be removed, symlink anything that needs to be symlinked, and alters your `PATH` as needed.

Additionally, generations are real, persistent things. By default, all generations are stored so if any package installation or update goes wrong, you can always safetly roll back to a previously good generation and you're golden.

If that isn't a superpower, I don't know what is! (UwU)

In my mind, every other benefit that you can get out of `nix` is an emergent property of the fact that `nix` is able to manage packages in a functional, declarative, and a generational way.

## What is Nix (Operating System)

Maybe somewhat obviously, `nixos` is a functional & declarative operating system based on Linux and the `nix` package manager :)

I've always thought that `nixos` is what happens when a mad scientist tries to embrace the `nix` philosophy to _everything_. Use `nix` to derive the entire OS state declaratively, functionally, and generationally.

### ELI5

Where `nix` lets you install packages, `nixos` lets you install packages, configure services, manage users, even update the kernel, all through editing some text files!

I won't go into _too_ much detail since we really do cover the basics when learning about `nix` the package manager, but that's pretty much all there is to `nixos`.

Outside of the fact that you're meant to manage it, configure it, and update it via configuration files, it just behaves like any other Linux distribution.

Well... except for one (relatively major) quirk... `nixos` doesn't comply with FHS at all, which means a lot of stuff can't be installed or run correctly unless it either supports `nixos` explicitly, or you install it _via_ `nix`.

What does an OS that doesn't comply with FHS mean? Well.. in practice you don't really notice it.

This mainly means there is no `/bin`, `/sbin`, `/lib`, etc since all packages are in the `/nix/store/`.

It also means entries in `/etc/` are just symlinks to entries in the `/nix/store/`.

I haven't specified this explicitly, but you're also not allowed to mutate the `/nix/store/` without interacting with `nix` itself!

You edit your system configuration, which is typically defined in `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`, and run `nixos-rebuild switch` to tell `nix` to build all the packages and configuration it needs.

Your `PATH`, current `nix-profile` generation, and everything else is updated accordingly.

When you use `nixos`, you get very familiar with this workflow. The command `nixos-rebuild switch` gets ingrained into your muscle memory!

One of the cool things about running `nixos-rebuild switch` is that its idempotent. Running it multiple times is totally fine unless something changes (due to the functional and pure nature of `nix`).

Actually, since the installation process for `nixos` is basically just writing your first `configuration.nix` and running `nixos-rebuild switch`, upgrading your system after the fact (or rolling back to a previous generation) is _practically_ the same as just reinstalling your OS :-)

Never again have I had to painfully debug and fix a borked `arch linux` installation (or give up and reinstall) because of a bad `nvidia` driver update (UwU)!!

### Modules

What's even cooler is that your `configuration.nix` isn't just `json` or `yaml`. Its written in `nix-lang` which is a fully fledged if somewhat strange programming language.

This means your config is fully programmable, you can refactor complex modules to smaller modules, refer to modules from other modules, optionally enable/disable modules based on various factors, and basically do whatever you want given enough time, skill, pain & suffering.

If you're one of those weird TDD cultists... you can even unit test your config ;-)

The following module is something I wrote that is part of my `configuration.nix`:

```nix
{ pkgs, lib, config, ... }:

with lib;
{
  options.modules.proxy = {
    enable = mkOption { type = types.bool; default = false; };
    openFirewall = mkOption { type = types.bool; default = false; };
    firewallPorts = mkOption { type = types.listOf types.port; default = [ 80 443 ]; };
    proxies = mkOption { type = types.attrsOf types.port; default = { }; };
  };

  config = mkIf config.modules.proxy.enable {
    networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = mkIf config.modules.proxy.openFirewall config.modules.proxy.firewallPorts;

    security.acme.acceptTerms = true;
    security.acme.defaults.email = "contact@vereis.com"

    services.nginx = {
      enable = true;
      virtualHosts =
        builtins.mapAttrs (host: port: {
          enableACME = true;
          forceSSL = true;
          locations."/".proxyPass = "http://127.0.0.1:${toString port}/";
        }) config.modules.proxy.proxies;
    };
  };
}
```

This module can be imported and enabled like so:

```nix
  imports = [
    modules/services/tailscale.nix
    modules/services/proxy.nix
  ]

  modules.tailscale.enable = true;
  modules.proxy = {
    enable = true;
    openFirewall = true;
    proxies = {
      "sonarr.vereis.com" = 8989;
      "radarr.vereis.com" = 7878;
      "prowlarr.vereis.com" = 9696;
      "transmission.vereis.com" = 9091;
      "lidarr.vereis.com" = 8686;
      "readarr.vereis.com" = 8787;
      "printer.vereis.com" = 631;
    };
  };
```

BOOM! What this module does is that it:

1. Installs `nginx`.
2. Opens any specified ports in my firewall.
3. Automatically creates a `nginx` config based on the provided `proxies` map to automatically setup the specified virtual hosts.
4. Configures a service to automatically start and monitor it via `systemd`.
5. Starts the service if it isn't already started, otherwise it restarts it.

One important call out is that the `nix-lang` is lazily evaluated. The above module refers to another (built in) module called `networking.firewall`.

As you can imagine, different modules can set `networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts` to different things. When `nix` goes to evaluate your overall configuration, all of these different settings are merged together unless explicitly made to overwrite configuration instead.

This leads to modules which can utilize other modules in almost magical ways. It means that a module for `fzf` and a module for `oh-my-zsh` can both utilize the built in `zsh` module to enable shell hooks, and more!

You typically don't run into any weirdness or issues with this, but it definitely isn't expected coming from non-lazy, non-functional programming languages.

## Flakes

I didn't really use `flakes` until relatively recently. It deffo isn't something you _need_ to use, but I do think that if you're new to `nix` you're better off doing so.

In my mind, `flakes` replace a lot of the stuff you need to reuse configs nicely across multiple machines. It also improves the developer experience which I'll go into shortly.

They also "fix" one of the only imperative parts of `nix` that I haven't touched on in this post called `channels`.

### Replacing channels

If you want to install `firefox`, say, `nix` will look up the package definition for `firefox` in [nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs).

> As it happens, `nixpkgs` is the largest software repository in the world. Even larger than `arch linux`'s (including the `AUR`).

However, the specific version of `firefox` installed is actually pinned to the state of `nixpkgs` at the time you installed `nixos` or `nix`, unless you've manually changed it since.

This "pinning" of package repository is effectively what a `nix-channel` is. You can add third party channels too, much like third party `apt` repositories.

Therefore, much like running a `sudo apt-update && apt-upgrade`, if you want to update your packages, what you're doing is effectively just changing the ref of the `nixpkg` repo that your channels point to.

Unfortunately, `nix-channel` is handled very imperatively. It is automatically set for you on installation, and managed in a completely adhoc manner.

So yes, I lied when I said `nix` and `nixos` are fully reproducible, but they _basically_ are if you assume that your `nix-channel` is the same across rebuilds.

Deffo less of a problem on one machine, but when managing multiple, it can be hard to track down the source of bugs, config errors, etc.

Thankfully, `flakes` are the solution to this!

You can add a `flake.nix` to the root of your projects, or use a `flake.nix` instead of a `configuration.nix`.

Upon evaluating the `flake.nix` (this is done differently based on what you're doing), a `flake.lock` is created which pins the version of every package you installed.

This means that you can upgrade individual packages without mutating the global state of your system.

More importantly, it means if you copy a `flake.nix` and `flake.lock` from one machine to another, you're guaranteed the exact same behaviour on both machines!

This is a very useful superpower!! You could achieve the same thing via various third party plugins such as [niv](https://github.com/nmattia/niv), but the more this sort of thing is built in, the better IMO. Especially to actually get traction.

### Replacing shells

While I didn't touch on this earlier, another superpower that `nix` gives you is the ability to enter a `nix-shell`.

You can think of a `nix-shell` as being a transient, short-lived `nix-profile` instance coupled to a terminal.

You can create `nix-shell` instances on the fly via `nix-shell -p <packages>`, or you can add a `shell.nix` to any directory to declaratively specify packages and shell configuration (environment variables and the like) and run `nix-shell`.

Doing so will drop you in a `bash` shell (by default) containing all of the packages you've defined plus any shell configuration.

If you want to, you can use a combination of [lorri](https://github.com/nix-community/lorri) and [direnv](https://direnv.net/) to automatically enter shells whenever you CD into a directory too!

This is super convenient and is definitely a superpower I can't live without.

Personally, I used to add a `shell.nix` to all the projects I work on (though I use a `flake.nix` now instead).

Despite being a superpower... `shell.nix` files are "stunted" when compared to a using `flakes`.

You simply put a `flake.nix` in your project and enter it with `nix develop`. These are cached and super fast (`nix-shell` needs to reevaluate itself on each invokation) and anything you install is pinned in your `flake.lock` file.

For example, this blog's `flake.nix` is pretty small, but installs `sqlite`, `elixir` and `nodejs`, and a few dev dependencies:

```nix
{
  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
    flake-utils.url = "github:numtide/flake-utils";
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, flake-utils }:
    flake-utils.lib.eachDefaultSystem (
      system:
        let
          pkgs = import nixpkgs { inherit system; };

          # `sha256` can be programmatically obtained via running the following:
          # `nix-prefetch-url --unpack https://github.com/elixir-lang/elixir/archive/v${version}.tar.gz`
          elixir_1_15_7 = (pkgs.beam.packagesWith pkgs.erlangR26).elixir_1_15.override {
            version = "1.15.7";
            sha256 = "0yfp16fm8v0796f1rf1m2r0m2nmgj3qr7478483yp1x5rk4xjrz8";
          };
        in
        with pkgs; {
          devShells.default = mkShell {
            buildInputs = [
              # API Deps ------------------------------------
              elixir_1_15_7 sqlite

              # Web Deps ------------------------------------
              nodePackages.prettier nodejs_20
            ]
              ++ lib.optionals stdenv.isLinux  ([ libnotify inotify-tools ])
              ++ lib.optionals stdenv.isDarwin ([ terminal-notifier
                                                  darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.CoreFoundation
                                                  darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.CoreServices
                                               ]);

            env = {
              ERL_AFLAGS = "-kernel shell_history enabled";
            };
          };
        }
    );
}
```

Just like `nix-shell`, you can also automatically enter a dev shell on CD via `direnv` like so:

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

if ! has nix_direnv_version || ! nix_direnv_version 2.4.0; then
  source_url "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nix-community/nix-direnv/2.4.0/direnvrc" "sha256-XQzUAvL6pysIJnRJyR7uVpmUSZfc7LSgWQwq/4mBr1U="
fi

use flake
```

Note that this _does not_ require `lorri`, so its even less configuration and package management than not using `flakes` -- a win to me, albeit a short one.

Projects that define a `flake.nix` can even be run without installing them manually via running [nix run <package_name>](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/new-cli/nix3-run.html), and more!

If this isn't a superpower, then again, I don't know what is! (UwU)

## My Configuration

I store my [Nix configuration](https://github.com/vereis/nixos) on GitHub, and all I need to get started is `git` and `nix`.

### Installation & Top Level

If I'm using a MacOS or Linux machine, I can jump straight into the default terminal and install `nix`.

I strongly recommend using the [Determinate Systems Nix Installer](https://github.com/DeterminateSystems/nix-installer), especially on MacOS, as it comes with a lot of niceties when compared to the vanilla `nix` installer.

On Windows, I'll install `WSL` before doing that. If you're using `WSL2` you can even import a `nixos` image to use, which I highly recommend.

Once `nix` is installed, I'll temporarily install `git` via `nix-shell -p git` to clone my repo and I run `nixos-rebuild switch`.

BOOM. Profit.

If my configuration doesn't already exist, I might be naughty and `nix-shell -p git neovim` instead and add my desired configuration before rebuilding.

One of the nice things about using `flakes` is that it lets you define various `nixosConfigurations` as a first class feature of `flakes`, which wasn't always the case. Without `flakes`, sharing your configuration and trying to reuse modules between multiple machines could be difficult and inconsistent.

A `nixosConfiguration` is typically keyed by machine `hostname`, so I make sure all my machines are named different thigns (which I'd do anything).

You can also define `darwinConfigurations` which are the same thing as `nixosConfigurations`, but for MacOS. I'm not sure if you _need_ `nix-darwin` to have access to this option, but you'll definitely need it to evaluate them!

> As a fun fact, all my machines named after characters in the `Puella Magi Madoka Magica` series, or its spin off `Magia Record`.
>
> My primary workstation is `madoka`, my XPS 15 is `sayaka`, my homelab is `kyubey`, and my Macbook Pro is `iroha`.

I try to keep my top level `flake.nix` pretty light. It installs all the third party modules I want to use via `inputs`, and then it builds all my `nixosConfigurations` or `darwinConfigurations` as needed.

```nix
{
  description = "Vereis' NixOS configuration";

  inputs =
    {
      nixpkgs.url = "github:nixos/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
      zjstatus.url = "github:dj95/zjstatus";
      nix-homebrew.url = "github:zhaofengli-wip/nix-homebrew";
      nix-darwin = {
        url = "github:LnL7/nix-darwin";
        inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
      };
      home-manager = {
        url = "github:nix-community/home-manager";
        inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
      };
      nixos-wsl = {
        url = "github:nix-community/NixOS-WSL";
        inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
      };
    };

  outputs = inputs @ { self, nixpkgs, nixos-wsl, zjstatus, home-manager, ... }:
    let
      username = "vereis";
    in
    {
      darwinConfigurations = (
        import ./machines/darwin { inherit (nixpkgs) lib; inherit inputs nixpkgs home-manager nix-darwin, nix-homebrew; }
      )
      nixosConfigurations = (
        import ./machines/linux { inherit (nixpkgs) lib; inherit inputs nixpkgs home-manager nixos-wsl username zjstatus; }
      );
    };
}
```

Because I use a lot of different machines, I delegate actually defining `darwinConfigurations` and `nixosConfigurations` to configuration files in `machines/darwin/` and `machines/linux/` respectively!

> When you're importing modules in `nix`, you can either import a specific module such as `modules/my-app.nix`, but you don't have to.
>
> If you import a directory instead, `nix` will assume you meant to import `$DIRECTORY/default.nix` instead.

I'll focus this post on `nixosConfigurations` because I imagine this is going to be the more common usecase, but honestly they're basically the same so I trust you to figure it out! Otherwise just check out my repo! (UwU)

### Machine Definitions

My top-level `default.nix` contains the boilerplate for defining a specific `nixosSystem` like so:

```nix
{ lib, inputs, nixpkgs, nix-darwin, home-manager, nixos-wsl, zjstatus, username, ... }:

let
  system = "x86_64-linux";
  pkgs = import nixpkgs { inherit system; config.allowUnfree = true; };
  lib = nixpkgs.lib;
in
{
  # Workstation PC
  madoka = lib.nixosSystem {
    inherit system;
    specialArgs = { inherit inputs username zjstatus; };
    modules = [
      ./madoka
      ./configuration.nix
      nixos-wsl.nixosModules.wsl
      home-manager.nixosModules.home-manager {
        home-manager.useGlobalPkgs = true;
        home-manager.useUserPackages = true;
        home-manager.extraSpecialArgs = { inherit username zjstatus; };
        home-manager.users.${username}.imports = [(import ./home.nix)] ++ [(import ./madoka/home.nix)];
      }
    ];
  };

  # Dell XPS 13
  homura = lib.nixosSystem {
    inherit system;
    specialArgs = { inherit inputs username zjstatus; };
    modules = [
      ./homura
      ./configuration.nix
      home-manager.nixosModules.home-manager {
        home-manager.useGlobalPkgs = true;
        home-manager.useUserPackages = true;
        home-manager.extraSpecialArgs = { inherit username zjstatus; };
        home-manager.users.${username}.imports = [(import ./home.nix)] ++ [(import ./homura/home.nix)];
      }
    ];
  };

  # Server / Homelab
  kyubey = lib.nixosSystem {
    inherit system;
    specialArgs = { inherit inputs username zjstatus; };
    modules = [
      ./kyubey
      ./configuration.nix
      home-manager.nixosModules.home-manager {
        home-manager.useGlobalPkgs = true;
        home-manager.useUserPackages = true;
        home-manager.extraSpecialArgs = { inherit username zjstatus; };
        home-manager.users.${username}.imports = [(import ./home.nix)] ++ [(import ./kyubey/home.nix)];
      }
    ];
  };

  ...
}
```

As you can see, this boilerplate contains configuration to set up `home-manager`, as well as imports to various other modules.

All systems import the top-level `machines/linux/configuration.nix` which is responsible for configuring packages/services which are shared between all my machines, such as ensuring packages like `killall` and `lsof` are installed, `flakes` are enabled, etc.

Additionally, all systems then import their specific `home.nix`, `services.nix`, `default.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix` from `machines/linux/$HOSTNAME/`.

### Home Modules

When I use `nix`, I try to make sure all of my packages are installed and configured through `home-manager` if they can be.

Generally, `home-manager` is able to install anything that you can install anything in `nixpkgs`, so 75% of my `nix` configuration can be found in any specific machine's `home.nix`, or under the reusable modules defined in `modules/home/`.

> If `home-manager` can install anything in `nixpkgs`, what do I mean "if they can be"?
>
> Well, that's a great question! Just because something _can be installed_ doesn't mean that it _can be used_.
>
> For example, you can install the `docker` binary via `home-manager`, but you don't get the service definitions and other stuff that actually makes it possible to run containers.
>
> In short, `home-manager` can install programs so long as they can be installed on a user-by-user basis, and don't require any daemons or services to run.

Alongside installing packages, `home-manager` also provides custom modules for configuring a lot of packages. You can see a list of [supported options here](https://mipmip.github.io/home-manager-option-search/). This makes customizing packages a breeze (though sometimes I do fall back to text config files)!!

For example, my `neovim` configuration is as follows:

```nix
{ config, lib, pkgs, ... }:

with lib;
{
  options.modules.neovim = {
    enable = mkOption { type = types.bool; default = false; };
  };

  config = mkIf config.modules.neovim.enable {
    home.packages = with pkgs; [
      stylua
      sumneko-lua-language-server
      shellcheck
      shfmt
      vale
      deno
      nodePackages.prettier
    ];

    programs.fzf.enable = true;
    programs.fzf.enableZshIntegration = true;

    home.sessionVariables = {
      FZF_DEFAULT_COMMAND = "rg --files | sort -u";
      EDITOR = "nvim";
      VISUAL = "nvim";
    };

    home.file.".vale.ini".source = ./neovim/.vale.ini;
    home.file.".config/nvim/lua/config.lua".source = ./neovim/config.lua;
    home.file.".local/share/nvim/site/pack/packer/start/packer.nvim" = {
      source = builtins.fetchGit {
        url = "https://github.com/wbthomason/packer.nvim";
        ref = "master";
        rev = "afab89594f4f702dc3368769c95b782dbdaeaf0a";
      };
    };

    programs.neovim = {
      enable = true;

      viAlias = true;
      vimAlias = true;
      vimdiffAlias = true;

      withNodeJs = true;
      withPython3 = true;

      extraConfig = ''
      lua require('config')
      '';
    };
  };
}
```

When a machine configuration imports `modules/home/vim.nix`, and sets `modules.vim.enabled = true` in their configuration, my `vim.nix` module will:

- install all required packages
- setups up shell integration for all installed packages, and configures them as needed
- copies over any dotfiles into the required places

### Service Modules

For things that can't be installed via `home-manager`, I'll create a module under the `modules/services/` directory and import it in my machine's `services.nix` instead.

A good example of this is the `proxy.nix` modules I shared above:

```nix
{ pkgs, lib, config, ... }:

with lib;
{
  options.modules.proxy = {
    enable = mkOption { type = types.bool; default = false; };
    openFirewall = mkOption { type = types.bool; default = false; };
    firewallPorts = mkOption { type = types.listOf types.port; default = [ 80 443 ]; };
    proxies = mkOption { type = types.attrsOf types.port; default = { }; };
  };

  config = mkIf config.modules.proxy.enable {
    networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = mkIf config.modules.proxy.openFirewall config.modules.proxy.firewallPorts;

    security.acme.acceptTerms = true;
    security.acme.defaults.email = "contact@vereis.com"

    services.nginx = {
      enable = true;
      virtualHosts =
        builtins.mapAttrs (host: port: {
          enableACME = true;
          forceSSL = true;
          locations."/".proxyPass = "http://127.0.0.1:${toString port}/";
        }) config.modules.proxy.proxies;
    };
  };
}
```

I don't have many services defined, since generally, I don't really need them.

Most of my machines use my `tailscale.nix` module to connect to my [Tailscale](https://tailscale.com) network. Some machines such as my homelab might manage torrent clients via services, or opt-into printer support via [CUPs](https://ubuntu.com/server/docs/service-cups).

Either way, they're imported and enabled in the same way as modules under `/modules/home/`, so they're super easy to use, write, and extend!

## What's next?

Well, that's actually about it. In short:

My `nixos` configuration uses `flakes` to configure my machines.

My machines configure themselves through `home` modules and `service` modules.

My modules are written in `nix-lang`, which leverage the `nix` package manager to install and configure themselves in a pure, functional, and declarative way.

This gives me a lot of superpowers, such as fearless upgrades, powerful developer shells, the ability to run multiple versions of the same packages, and more!! (UwU)

While I can definitely appreciate how daunting the `nix` tech tree is, I hope this post presents it in a way that at very least makes sense!

You can definitely get a lot of the same benefits from using tools like `docker`, `ansible`, `asdf`, `pyenv`, etc, but the single biggest superpower for `nix` is that its all a single tool.

Once you learn `nixos` (and `nix` alone, to some extent), you can use it to manage _everything_ in your operating system, your projects, your users, etc.

You can even build minimal and pure [docker containers](https://nix.dev/tutorials/nixos/building-and-running-docker-images.html) without installing `docker`!

I'm definitely the only weirdo at [Vetspire](https://vetspire.com) that uses `nix`, and was one of a small handful of two at [Erlang Solutions](https://erlang-solutions.org)...

Because of this, I've not really used `nix` as a solution to CI or testing, nor have I looked into `nix` as a devops tool, but these are things that you can do too!

Anyway, I always ramble too much... so...

Peace nerds <3
