---
title: About Elixir
slug: about_elixir
is_draft: true
reading_time_minutes:
published_at: 2023-09-16 14:02:12Z
tags:
  - elixir
  - erlang
---

In my professional career, I've had the pleasure of working with [Erlang](https://erlang.org) and [Elixir](https://elixir-lang.org) practically since the beginning.

## How I got into the BEAM

During the second year of my computer science degree at the [University of Kent](https://kent.ac.uk), all students had to take a mandatory 'Concurrent & Distributed Systems' module. This module was taught exclusively in Erlang due to (imo) its unparalleled characteristics specially around concurrency and distributed programming.

Initially, this module was extremely difficult, having come from a very traditional programming language background (JavaScript, Java, C, C++). Things like functional programming, recursion, the Prolog inspired syntax, etc all broke my brain.

In an effort to do well in the module, I forced myself to write all of my upcoming university assignments in Erlang, and after doing that for awhile, everything just clicked!

Erlang was a pleasure to write (for reasons I'll detail below), and I ended up focusing on it for my thesis project which was an [Erlang->JavaScript compiler](https://github.com/vereis/jarlang), finding an Erlang consulting gig straight out of University, and the rest is history.

It wasn't long until I ended up being put on projects that used Elixir as opposed to Erlang. Where in the Erlang side of things I was primarily working on legacy financial or chat systems, the Elixir projects I was on exposed me much more to the web dev and embedded side of things.

After learning Elixir (which is pretty easy when you're coming from Erlang), I realized that this was it! Much like NixOS and other technologies I've adopted, I found my place!

It upsets me (despite the growing community and ecosystem) how relatively unknown Elixir (and Erlang to a larger degree) is, so I thought I'd do my part and talk about all the things I've come to appreciate in these technologies :-)

## What is Erlang

- Functional Programming
- Actor model
- Concurrency
- Distributed Programming

## What is Elixir

- Main differences
- Macros
- Design decisions
- Ecosystem

## Special Forms

- Pipes
- With Statement
- Conditionals

## Macros

- Machines
- Home Manager
- Modules
- Services
- Nix-Darwin

## Killer Apps

- Ecto
- Phoenix
- Absinthe
- Oban
- LiveView
- LiveBook
- AI

## Letting it Crash

## Mistakes

- People not learning, avoiding Erlang
- Overusing pipes
- Patterns

## Recommended Resources

- Learn you some erlang for great good
- Erlang Programming and OTP (Cesarini)
- Programming in Elixir
- Metaprogramming in Elixir
- Videos
  - The soul of Erlang
