---
title: Migrating my blog
slug: migrating_my_blog
is_draft: false
reading_time_minutes:
published_at: 2023-07-22 20:09:30Z
tags:
  - elixir
  - misc
---

Back in late 2019, I built the first version of my blog which I actually kept up with (_somewhat_).

I'm surprised that I managed to keep it online, and contribute to it over the last four years. Some points even saw relative success amongst the `nix` and `elixir` communities!

That track record ends approximately today: I've grown and changed a lot in the last four years. Some of the changes that happened between then and now include:

1. I was promoted from a Junior Software Engineer to a Tech/Team Lead, and I generally have much more experience now.
2. My philosophies about how to build software have dramtically changed. New tech in the ecosystem exists now too.
3. My personal identity is different now, as is how I communicate and write.

As a result, I've decided to shut down by old blog, and migrate to this one, if only for a fresh start!

## The Old Blog

When I released the old blog, I did a short write-up on how it all worked. If you're interested in that, you'll be able to read the original (effectively) forever [here](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old/issues/2), but I thought it'd be fun to do a retrospective writeup on the original designs and compare to what I'm doing today.

### First Iteration

The first version of the blog was a basic `Phoenix` application with nothing fancy. I have never been particularly fond of adding too much unneccessary complexity to simple sites, so all my blog did was look up whatever post was requested by slug (passed in as a URL param) and displayed it. Completely unremarkable.

The fun bit, however, was that I didn't want to bother to learn how to set up a CI/CD pipeline, or manually futz around with creating tooling or investing in a pipeline to render blog posts, to do syntax highlighting, etc.

As a result, the quirkiest thing about the old blog was the fact that my posts were stored exclusively in [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old/issues/)!

I still think that this was a fun little idea because it meant that I didn't need any code deployments to write or edit posts, nor did I have to worry about tagging posts, rendering HTML, emoji-support, hosting a DB, etc.

However, the problem was that each time a post was requested, my blog's backend would fire off a GraphQL request to GitHub to fetch the required content and metadata before serving it to any potential viewers.

This wasn't the best for latency, but it still felt _somewhat_ acceptable, and this worked for a long time! When one of my posts got a little popular however... I was rate-limited by GitHub and I was effectively offline!

### Second Iteration - Caching and ETS

So two major problems were identified with the very simplistic implementation mentioned:

1. You could definitely feel the latency on every post request.
2. If any of my posts actually got read en masse, my blog would be rate-limited by GitHub again and go dark.

I still didn't want to walk down the path of hosting a database, or anything complicated. I wanted to make minimal changes to my overall setup while still trying to solve the two identified problems (quickly).

Simplicity wasn't the only reason the original iteration of the blog fetched posts on every request. Doing this gave the advantage that I could edit posts in real-time and see them update immediately. This was useful, but not particularly neccessary, so after some thinking, I decided it would be more than appropriate to cache the posts for a short period of time rather than solely relying on GitHub as a datastore.

Now, on application start up, I'd start a `GenServer` responsible for polling the GitHub GraphQL API for all posts. It'd then use `Process.send_after/3` to trigger another poll-iteration after a few minutes had elapsed.

This polling change was simple, but I now needed a local datastore to keep track of cached content.

Instead of reaching for a fully fledged database, I used a library called [Etso](https://github.com/evadne/etso) which allows you to use `:ets` as a backend for `Ecto`, giving you the convinience of the batteries-included nature of `:ets` while still giving you the high level declarative querying powers that come with `Ecto`!

This worked for a long time, and it would be years until it changed again.

The main drive for the third (and final) iteration was that I was getting far more familiar with `PostgreSQL` at work, and as a result, I wanted to build cooler features that weren't fully implemented: namely tagging. However, occasionally I'd notice that my `GenServer` wouldn't be polling jobs anymore, so I wanted a more resilient way to deal with that too...

> As an aside, I did have the MVP functionality for tagging done, but because `Etso` doesn't fully implement `Ecto.Query`'s API, a lot of it was done with hacky post-processing using `Enum` and `List`.
>
> There was nothing _wrong_ with this approach... but it really irked at my personal sense of code aesthetics. After all, what purpose does a blog solve if not scratching the author's itch in all ways?!

### Third Iteration - Postgres and Oban

At this point in time, I was pretty familiar with `PostgreSQL` and was starting to use [Oban](https://getoban.pro) more and more at work.

I still didn't invest in anything too fancy for the database, despite having a real one now. The source of truth for my blog's content was still GitHub Issues, so I didn't really care about how resilient the database was, or if it needed backups or anything.

I had an instance of `PostgreSQL` running via `docker-compose` (just like you would develop locally) and effectively treated it the same way I treated my `:ets` tables from the `Etso` solution.

Now that I had full access to the fancier stuff `Ecto` can do, however, I started building loads of teeny, small quality of life things. I finished tagging, and everything was great!

I was able to port my poller `GenServer` almost verbatim into an `Oban.Job` and had it autostart via `crontab` configuration.

Outside of several large styling and design changes, this is how my blog remained until today. Somewhere along the way, I got sucked into the [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) rabbit-hole too, but nothing really architecturally resulted from it.

### Archive & Popular Posts

You'll more or less always be able to view the source code of the old blog [on GitHub](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old) if for whatever reason you're interested!

Below is a list of the most popular posts I made too:

1. [Refububg Ecto Query Composition](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old/issues/42)
2. [Compositional Elixir - Ecto Query Patterns](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old/issues/32)
3. [A minimal Nix development environment on WSL](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old/issues/22)
4. [Drinking the NixOS kool aid](https://github.com/vereis/blog-old/issues/11)

## The New Blog

`Phoenix LiveView` was something I had wanted to play with for awhile, and while a blog wasn't really going to stress it out very much, or be a very novel way of learning it, I personally love having a blog precisely for being able to _play with new tech_.

Additionally, the old version of the blog had always been hosted on a VPS of some kind (I believe it was originally on [Digital Ocean](https://digitalocean.com), before moving it [Hetzner](https://hetzner.com). This time, I wanted to play around with [Fly.io](https://fly.io) because I keep hearing good things, and find the underlying technology really impressive!

> As an aside, I had hosted some toy projects on [Gigalixir](gigalixir.com) and toyed around with hosting the old blog there while it was still running on `:ets`. For some reason I never stuck to it -- possibly due to the fact that your services would shut down after some time on the free tier, and I couldn't justify the cost of the hosting at the time when it only supported Elixir projects (I had a few non-Elixir services on my VPSes)...
>
> Today, I've more or less consolidated all my important services onto a single beefy workstation I have hidden in my living room, so this is far less of a problem! Plus self-hosting `Phoenix LiveView` probably performs noticeably worse on a global scale than deploying to multiple regions (which `Fly` makes stupid simple).

### Storage

Because I want to try hosting on `Fly`, I've decided to step out of my comfort zone a little bit and try playing with `SQLite` instead of `PostgreSQL`. This is a really exciting change because a lot of what I'm working on at work could benefit a lot from using `SQLite` in certain scenarios.

Setting it up was a little difficult as its done totally differently from the equivalent `PostgreSQL` setup, but now that its done, I don't have to worry about actually managing my database at all, and I no longer need `docker` at all to host my blog.

Migrations, queries, and everything else seem to just work at the moment, so other than being an exciting new change, nothing is really impacted here! As it turns out, `Oban` also supports `SQLite` as a backend now too so I don't need to reinvent anything fancy.

### Data Access

A lot of the data-access learnings I've made on my last Blog, and at work, was formalized in my [Ecto Utils](https://github.com/vereis/ecto_utils) library.

I'll write a blog post about `Ecto Utils` in particular, as there is a lot to talk about there, but as a result, my actual data access layer is super simple. `Ecto Utils` provides several extensions to standard `Ecto` functionality, including `EctoUtils.Queryable`.

All of my database schemas `use EctoUtils.Queryable` and thus, they automatically inherit the ability to be queried in a way not-too-dissimilar to the ability to lookup records via `Ecto.Repo.get_by/2`.

For example, querying posts is done via an autogenerated `query/2` function on all schemas, and is used thusly:

```elixir
def get_post(id) do
  get_post(id: id)
end

def get_post(filters) do
  filters |> Post.query() |> Repo.one()
end

def list_post(filters) do
  filters |> Post.query() |> Repo.all()
end
```

This made rewriting the blog from scratch extremely quick and easy. I actually managed to rewrite the whole thing (frontend and backend) in a few hours!

### Seeding Posts

My blog posts are now stored as `Markdown` files with `YAML` frontmatter -- much like the standard for other engines such as Jekyll.

> This has the added benefit of letting me use my very heavily customized text editor... something I didn't realize I'd want or need with the old GitHub Issues setup...

These are stored in the `priv/` directory, and they get automatically parsed and imported on application startup. Since posts are now standalone files in my `priv/` directory, I'm not going to bother doing anything fancier than this.

I can manually call `Blog.Posts.Importer.run!/0` to preview changes as I write, and in a deployed environment, I have to redeploy to make changes anyway!

> One interesting note is that instead of using [Earmark](https://hex.pm/packages/earmark) which is a sort of community standard for parsing Markdown in Elixir, I'm using [Md](https://hex.pm/packages/md) which both claims to be faster, and more extensible by myself if I ever need that!
>
> Actually using it as been very painless out-of-the-box but I'm excited to play around with building custom Markdown extensions for conversation snippets like on [Xe's site](https://xeiaso.net).
>
> My first impressions are very positive so I'd definitely recommend checking it out!

### LiveView

I decided to keep the frontend component of the blog very barebones too. I have a single LiveView hosted on three seperate routes, each with its own `live_action`.

If the `live_action` is the post list, then I render the list of posts. Otherwise I render either the first blog post in the database (which is my "Hello, world!" post) or the selected post via URL slug.

In the future, I want to play around with having live reader counts and such, but because I want to deploy the new blog ASAP, that'll be a nice to have I can save for later.

## Closing Remarks

I won't dwell or talk too much further about my blog! I just feel that starting a new blog project warrants _something_ being said at the beginning of it, and while I was looking over my old posts, I felt nostalgic having kicked off the original one with something similar!

My blog's source code is freely available [on GitHub](https://github.com/vereis/blog).

Thank you for reading, and hopefully I can contribute to this one more regularly than the last!
